KEP 1618: Optional garbage collection of finished Workloads (#2742)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/1618-optional-gc-of-workloads/README.md

Reviewer: Just a nit - could we use `Kueue` with capitalized K instead of `kueue` to be consistent with other artifacts?

Author: Done

is being proposed.

With this mechanism in place, deleting finished and deactivated Workloads has several benefits:
- **Deletion of superfluous information**: Finished Workloads do not store any useful runtime-related information 
(which is stored by Jobs), nor are they useful for debugging. They could possibly be useful for auditing purposes, 
but this is not a primary concern.
- **Decreasing Kueue memory footprint**: Finished and deactivated Workloads are loaded during Kueue's initialization and kept in memory, 
consuming resources unnecessarily.
- **Freeing up etcd storage**: Finished and deactivated Workloads are stored in etcd memory until Kubernetes' built-in GC mechanism 
collects them, but by default, Custom Resources are stored indefinitely.

### Goals

- Support the deletion of finished and deactivated Workload objects.
- Introduce configuration of global retention policies for Kueue-authored Kubernetes objects, 
- Maintain backward compatibility (the feature must be explicitly enabled and configured).

### Non-Goals

> - Support the deletion/expiration of jobs or other Kubernetes objects not authored by Kueue.

Reviewer 2: Actually, in case of deleting workloads due to deactivation we need to delete the actual Job object. See the script in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/4471#issuecomment-2699341853, it says `delete_jobset`

## Proposal

Add a new field called `objectRetentionPolicies` to the Kueue Configuration API, 
which will enable specifying a retention policy for finished and deactivated Workloads first under a
`WorkloadRetentionPolicy` section. This API would be extended in the future 
with options for other Kueue-managed objects.

### User Stories

> #### Story 1 - Configurable retention for finished and deactivated Workloads

Reviewer 2: I would this as separate user stories, since they originated from two different issues.

Reviewer 3: Have split this in two user stories

    ObjectRetentionPolicies *ObjectRetentionPolicies `json:"objectRetentionPolicies,omitempty"`
}

// ObjectRetentionPolicies holds retention settings for different object types.
type ObjectRetentionPolicies struct {
    // Workloads configures retention for finished Workloads.
    // A nil value disables automatic deletion of finished Workloads.
    // +optional
    Workloads *WorkloadRetentionPolicy `json:"workloads,omitempty"`
}

// WorkloadRetentionPolicy defines when finished Workloads should be deleted.
type WorkloadRetentionPolicy struct {
    // AfterFinished is the duration to wait after a Workload finishes
    // before deleting it.
    // A duration of 0 will delete immediately.
    // A nil value disables automatic deletion.
    // Represented using metav1.Duration (e.g. "10m", "1h30m").
    // +optional
    AfterFinished *metav1.Duration `json:"afterFinished,omitempty"`
    // AfterDeactivated is the duration to wait after a Workload has been deactivated
    // before deleting it.
    // A duration of 0 will delete immediately.
    // A nil value disables automatic deletion.
    // Represented using metav1.Duration (e.g. "10m", "1h30m").
    // +optional

>     AfterDeactivated *metav1.Duration `json:"afterDeactivated,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: We need to describe and warn users this may actually delete objects not created by Kueue directly.

Reviewer 3: Described deletion of jobsets and how that might delete objects not created by Kueue

Reviewer 2: This is not just about JobSet, in general any  workload objects (like Job or JobSet) which are manged by Kueue.

Reviewer 3: Have changed the description, this one should reflect the functionality better

Reviewer 2: sgtm

>     AfterDeactivated *metav1.Duration `json:"afterDeactivated,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Since this is an intrusive operation (may delete Jobs not created by Kueue0 I would consider API which day one filters the workloads by the reason for deactivation. For example:
```golang
afterDeactivated:
  onReasons:
  - reason:  RequeuingLimitExceeded
     ttl: 10min
  - reason:  MaximumExecutionTimeExceeded
     ttl: 20min
  defaultTTL: 1h # optional
```
wdyt @tenzen-y @mwysokin ?

Reviewer 4: The workload condition reasons are not documented, and we do not clear when the workloads get those reasons. Additionally, we do not guarantee using the reason name and reachable criteria. So, it's challenging to specify the exact reasons here for users.

So, I would keep the current `afterFinished` and `afterDeactivated`.

Reviewer 2: > The workload condition reasons are not documented

The workload condition reasons are not documented, and we do not clear when the workloads get those reasons.

>  So, I would keep the current afterFinished and afterDeactivated.

Ok, we can start here.

changes, or if there is an external source of a finalizer being attached 
to the Workload, it will be marked for deletion by the Kubernetes client 
but will not actually be deleted until the finalizer is removed.
- If the retention policy is misconfigured 
(the provided value is not a valid time.Duration), Kueue will fail to start 
during configuration parsing.
- In the default scenario, where the object retention policy section 
is not configured or Workload retention is either not configured 
or set to null, the existing behavior is maintained for backward compatibility. 
This means that Workload objects will not be deleted by Kueue, 
aligning with the behavior before the introduction of this feature.

### Risks and Mitigations

- **R**: In clusters with a large number of existing finished and deactivated Workloads 
(thousands, tens of thousands, etc.), it may take a significant amount of time
to delete all Workloads that qualify for deletion. Since the 
reconciliation loop is effectively synchronous, this may impact the reconciliation 
of new jobs. From the user's perspective, it may seem like Kueue's initialization 

> time is very long for that initial run until all expired objects are deleted.\

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
time is very long for that initial run until all expired objects are deleted.
```

nit

Reviewer 3: Thanks, have removed it

    // +optional
    Workloads *WorkloadRetentionPolicy `json:"workloads,omitempty"`
}

// WorkloadRetentionPolicy defines the policies for when Workloads should be deleted.
type WorkloadRetentionPolicy struct {
    // AfterFinished is the duration to wait after a Workload finishes
    // before deleting it.
    // A duration of 0 will delete immediately.
    // A nil value disables automatic deletion.
    // Represented using metav1.Duration (e.g. "10m", "1h30m").
    // +optional
    AfterFinished *metav1.Duration `json:"afterFinished,omitempty"`
    // AfterDeactivated is the duration to wait after *any* Kueue-managed Workload
    // (such as a Job, JobSet, or other custom workload types) has been marked
    // as deactivated before automatically deleting it.
    // Deletion of deactivated workloads may cascade to objects not created by
    // Kueue, since deleting the parent Workload owner (e.g. JobSet) can trigger
    // garbage-collection of dependent resources.
    // A duration of 0 will delete immediately.
    // A nil value disables automatic deletion.
    // Represented using metav1.Duration (e.g. "10m", "1h30m").
    // +optional

>     AfterDeactivated *metav1.Duration `json:"afterDeactivated,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: How to distinguish between manual deactivation and deactivation by Kueue?

Reviewer 2: I think this is not possible at the moment in a clean API. I think when Kueue deactivates we use the DeactivationTarget condition: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/6d4ef2bd6bbefde82d02d68adecc534608cb58f7/pkg/controller/core/workload_controller.go#L200

```golang
		reason := kueue.WorkloadDeactivated
		message := "The workload is deactivated"
		dtCond := apimeta.FindStatusCondition(wl.Status.Conditions, kueue.WorkloadDeactivationTarget)
		if !apimeta.IsStatusConditionTrue(wl.Status.Conditions, kueue.WorkloadEvicted) {
			if dtCond != nil {
				reason = fmt.Sprintf("%sDueTo%s", reason, dtCond.Reason)
				message = fmt.Sprintf("%s due to %s", message, dtCond.Message)
			}
			workload.SetEvictedCondition(&wl, reason, message)
			updated = true
			evicted = true
		}
```
So we could say that if deactivated by Kueue then it starts with "DeactivatedDueTo".

Would you like to only delete those deactivated by Kueue? I think this makes sense. cc @mwysokin if you have some ideas.

Reviewer 4: > Would you like to only delete those deactivated by Kueue? I think this makes sense.

I think so too. Manual deactivation has semantics based on users or in-house controllers. In that case, they should manually delete the Workload object by themselves. IIUC, this feature aims to automatically delete the Workload that is automatically preserved by the Kueue deactivation mechanism.

Reviewer 2: `AfterDeactivatedByKueue` should we call it then, and could recognize by the "DeactivatedDueTo" prefix?

Reviewer 4: I think we have 3 selectable options

1. Renaming the field name to `AfterDeactivatedByKueue`.
2. Adding a knob under the `afterDeactivated` field whether or not all deactivated workload should be removed automatically.
3. Adding active field to status sub resource to distinguish between those

For v1beta1 API, we can select (1, and after we figure out the use case for deleting manual deactivated workload, we can add `AfterDeactivatedByManual`. For v1beta2, we might be able to improve those by status field.

Reviewer 4: SGTM

Reviewer 3: Have renamed the field to be `AfterDeactivatedByKueue`

>     AfterDeactivatedByKueue *metav1.Duration `json:"afterDeactivated,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    AfterDeactivatedByKueue *metav1.Duration `json:"afterDeactivatedByKueue,omitempty"`
```

Let's update YAML as well

title can help communicate what the KEP is and should be considered as part of
any review.
-->

<!--
A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a KEP and for
highlighting any additional information provided beyond the standard KEP
template.

Ensure the TOC is wrapped with
  <code>&lt;!-- toc --&rt;&lt;!-- /toc --&rt;</code>
tags, and then generate with `hack/update-toc.sh`.
-->

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories](#user-stories)
    - [Story 1 - Configurable retention for finished Workloads](#story-1---configurable-retention-for-finished-workloads)
  - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats](#notesconstraintscaveats)
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [API](#api)
  - [Behavior](#behavior)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> <!--

Reviewer 5: Please remove the comments

Reviewer 3: Done

- **Deletion of superfluous information**: Finished Workloads do not store any useful runtime-related information 
(which is stored by Jobs), nor are they useful for debugging. They could possibly be useful for auditing purposes, 
but this is not a primary concern.
- **Decreasing Kueue memory footprint**: Finished Workloads are loaded during Kueue's initialization and kept in memory, 
consuming resources unnecessarily.
- **Freeing up etcd storage**: Finished Workloads are stored in etcd memory until Kubernetes' built-in GC mechanism 
collects them, but by default, Custom Resources are stored indefinitely.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Support the deletion of finished Workload objects.
- Introduce configuration of global retention policies for Kueue-authored Kubernetes objects, 
starting with finished Workloads.
- Maintain backward compatibility (the feature must be explicitly enabled and configured).

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

> - Support the deletion/expiration of any Kueue-authored Kubernetes object other than finished Workloads.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Support the deletion/expiration of jobs or other Kubernetes objects not authored by Kueue.
```

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

> Add a new API called `objectRetentionPolicies`, 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Add a new field called `objectRetentionPolicies` to the Kueue Configuration API, 
```

Reviewer 3: Done

which will enable specifying a retention policy for finished Workloads under an option 
called `FinishedWorkloadRetention`. This API section could be extended in the future 

> with options for other Kueue-authored objects.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
with options for other Kueue-managed objects.
```

Reviewer 3: Done

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1 - Configurable retention for finished Workloads

As a Kueue administrator, I want to control the retention of 
finished Workloads to minimize the memory footprint and optimize 
storage usage in my Kubernetes cluster. I want the flexibility to 
configure a retention period to automatically delete Workloads after a 
specified duration or to immediately delete them upon completion.

**Note:** Immediate deletion can be configured by setting the retention period to 0 seconds.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

- Initially, other naming was considered for config keys. Namely, instead of "Objects," 

> the word "Resources" was used, but based on feedback from `@alculquicondor`, it was changed 

Reviewer 5: we don't usually keep the names of the people who suggested the changes.

Reviewer 3: Removed these references

   during the next reconciliation loop after the Workload was declared finished.
   Based on the evaluation result against the retention policy, the Workload will
   either be requeued for later reconciliation or deleted.

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*
The goal is to ensure that we don't accept enhancements with inadequate testing.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

[X] I understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

[//]: # (##### Prerequisite testing updates)

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (<!--)

[//]: # (Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior)

[//]: # (implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.)

> [//]: # (-->)

Reviewer 5: You can remove this if there aren't any requirements.

That's why, based on user feedback in [#1618](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1618), a mechanism for garbage collection of finished Workloads 
is being proposed.

With this mechanism in place, deleting finished Workloads has several benefits:
- **Deletion of superfluous information**: Finished Workloads do not store any useful runtime-related information 
(which is stored by Jobs), nor are they useful for debugging. They could possibly be useful for auditing purposes, 
but this is not a primary concern.
- **Decreasing Kueue memory footprint**: Finished Workloads are loaded during Kueue's initialization and kept in memory, 
consuming resources unnecessarily.
- **Freeing up etcd storage**: Finished Workloads are stored in etcd memory until Kubernetes' built-in GC mechanism 
collects them, but by default, Custom Resources are stored indefinitely.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Support the deletion of finished Workload objects.
- Introduce configuration of global retention policies for Kueue-authored Kubernetes objects, 

> starting with finished Workloads.

Reviewer 4: Does this mean that you will work on the deletion of other objects except the finished Workloads in the next iteration?

But, you mention that ''Support the deletion/expiration of any Kueue-authored Kubernetes object other than finished Workloads.'' in the Non-Goals section.

Author: The goal was to include certain extensibility into the design so that other objects could be added without modifying root lvl API (`Jobs`, etc.). That's the main reason why the API key for `Workloads` is nested. I haven't seen any issues for removal of completed object (other than orphaned `Workloads` #1789) but if there's any interest in extending that feature I'd be happy to work on it. I'm also happy to work on any updates to this KEP if we decide to extend the cleanup process to other objects.

Reviewer 4: I would recommend limiting the scope for this KEP to Kueue managed objects, not only to Kueue Workload objects since actually, we aim to extend the API for the future extensibility for the other Kueue managed resources like AdmissionCheck.

The v1beta1 means that we can not bring breaking changes to APIs without bumping the API version.
So, I would like to take care of future API possibilities in this KEP.

So, my recommendation is to remove "starting with finished Workloads." from Goal, and move the statement to the proposal. And then, mention that we do not aim to add APIs for the Jobs like batch/job, RayJob as we discussed in another thread...
I'm wondering if we need to add another mechanisms for the Jobs retention in the future when we find the actual use cases.

Author: Got it. Let me propose another set of changes tomorrow.

Reviewer 5: > Introduce configuration of global retention policies for Kueue-authored Kubernetes objects

This sentence matches `Workload` and `ProvisioiningRequest`. We don't need to clean up provisioning requests explicitly, because they are children of the `Workloads`.

So, for now, we only need to take care of `Workloads`. But I agree we should keep the API extensible for supporting the cleanup of finished jobs, but that can be addressed in a separate KEP.

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

- **R**: In clusters with a large number of existing finished Workloads 
(thousands, tens of thousands, etc.), it may take a significant amount of time
to delete all previously finished Workloads that qualify for deletion. Since the 
reconciliation loop is effectively synchronous, this may impact the reconciliation 
of new jobs. From the user's perspective, it may seem like Kueue's initialization 
time is very long for that initial run until all expired objects are deleted.\
**M**: Unfortunately, there is no easy way to mitigate this without complicating the code.
A potential improvement would be to have a dedicated internal queue that handles deletion 
outside the reconciliation loop, or to delete expired objects in batches so that after 
a batch of deletions is completed, any remaining expired objects would be skipped until 

> the next run of the loop. However, this would go against the synchronous nature of the reconciliation loop.

Reviewer 4: I believe that we can mitigate this risk by setting the strictly qps only when admins enable this feature.
Once we limit the client qps and burst in the KueueConfiguration, we can mitigate the burst kube-apiserver load.

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/c6f181ba7c2f0954accba777accd50bed4d56edb/config/components/manager/controller_manager_config.yaml#L21-L23

So, I would propose the mentioning limiting client qps when the admins enable this feature in the existing cluster.
Hence, could you mention this mitigation here?

Reviewer 3: Have added a mention about limiting the qps

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> ### API

Reviewer 4: TBH, I feel that this API looks like a half-bake to me.
Because when we add new policies to garbage collect other resources like integrations Jobs, we need to hard cord the API name here like `FinishedRayClusterRetention`. But, the Kueue integration Jobs are the extensible interface for external Jobs like AppWrapper or in-house one. So, I guess that it is challenging to maintain retention policies for all integrations like:

```yaml
[...]
objectRetentionPolicies:
  finiishedWorkloadRetention: 10s
  failedRayClusterRetention: 30s
  # How to specify in-house or other OSS resource policy, here?
  # In the upstream Kueue, we can not find all integrations 
  # since the integration framework could be implemented in other places regardless of private or public repositories.
[...]
```
From another perspective, even if we restrict the objective objects to specify retention duration, this API is a little bit extensible because in spite of that the API says that this API is used for retention policies for "object", but in this case, actually, we can specify only Workload retention policies.

```yaml
objectRetentionPolicies:
 finishedWorkloadRetention: 10s
 succeededWorkloadRetention: 30s 
```

In conclusion, I would ask which objects will you support in this feature through all iterations?
It's only Workload? or It's arbitrary objects?

Author: TBH I started working on this KEP without too much vision but rather I wanted to implement #1618 and I wanted to make the API flexible enough so that it could be extended with other object types in the future. After reading what you said it indeed makes sense to come up with a consistent approach for all objects so that user's could benefit from Kueue's extensibility. 

I don't have much experience with KEPs so I'm not sure what should happen now. For sure I'd like to ship the feature so that it doesn't slowly fades away in the in-review stage but at the same time if you feel that it's half-baked maybe I need to make a step back and come up with a more flexible approach. All feedback and guidance is really welcome 🙇 

I'll do some research over the weekend and I'll try to propose something early next week.

Reviewer 2: There are a couple of questions / aspects I see touched here:
1. should we make it generic to cover Job CRDs?
2. should we nest the API inside `objectRetentionPolicies`?

Re 1: There is an intrinsic asymmetry between workloads and Job CRDs. Job CRDs are created by users who can specify `spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished`. Workloads are created by Kueue, and so users don't have this control. So, I think it is justified to start from Workloads only and have the API field specific to them.

Another API maintained by Kueue that comes to my mind is ProvisioningRequest. I think having `finishedProvisioningRequestRetention` will make sense too (but we can leave it for later as currently we delete them eagerly anyway).

Re 2: I think it makes sense to nest the API inside `objectRetentionPolicies` to be future-proof in case we have some other objects with lifetime maintained by Kueue (like provisioning requests, or different policies for finished workloads depending on success  /failure).

Reviewer 4: > Re 1: There is an intrinsic asymmetry between workloads and Job CRDs. Job CRDs are created by users who can specify spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished. Workloads are created by Kueue, and so users don't have this control. So, I think it is justified to start from Workloads only and have the API field specific to them.

Yes, I agree with you. TBH, I don't prefer to implement the feature to do garbage collection of Jobs since I'm thinking that deletion jobs are responsible for Job's own controller like `ttlSecondsAfterFinished`. But this proposed API is extensible for Job API. So, I asked, "which objects will you support in this feature".

> Another API maintained by Kueue that comes to my mind is ProvisioningRequest. I think having finishedProvisioningRequestRetention will make sense too (but we can leave it for later as currently we delete them eagerly anyway).

I agree with you. I believe that the separate and dedicated CRDs for this feature are overkill. So, I would recommend not introducing the dedicated CRD.

> Re 2: I think it makes sense to nest the API inside objectRetentionPolicies to be future-proof in case we have some other objects with lifetime maintained by Kueue (like provisioning requests, or different policies for finished workloads depending on success /failure).

If we want to support additional Kueue-managed objects in the future,
could we add a dedicated field for each object something like this?
I guess that the criterion for garbage collection depends on the object’s kind. 

```yaml
workloadRetentionPolicy:
  onConditions:
    [metav1.Condition]
admissionCheckRetentionsPolicy:
  onConditions:
    [metav1.Condition]
  onResourceFlavor:
    name: xxx
    ...
```

Author: This looks a bit more complex than I originally anticipated but I agree that it's quite extensible. TBH I lack expertise when it comes evaluating whether this would be a consistent and a good way for Kueue to support that so I'll defer to other maintainers (@mimowo, @alculquicondor). Once we reach the consensus I'll be happy to implement it.

Reviewer 5: I think that API looks too complex. For the most part, we will be happy just cleaning up finished Workloads.

Let me propose the following:

```yaml
objectRetentionPolicies:
  workloads:
    afterFinished: 10m
```

It leaves us the possibility to extend to other objects and to even add conditions, but I prefer we don't give that flexibility yet.

Reviewer 4: > but I prefer we don't give that flexibility yet.

I understand this motivation. But, on the other hand, the proposed API still says that it can be extensible somehow in the future.

For the current API design, I am concerned that we extend the API something like below because the API doesn't restrict the target object to Workload.

```yaml
[...]
objectRetentionPolicies:
  finiishedWorkloadRetention: 10s
  acceptedAdmissionCheckRetention: 30s
[...]
```

So, I would like to select either 1. restricting the target object to Workload or 2. leaving the possibility for the other objects like this:

1

```yaml
[...]
workloadRetentionPolicies:
  afterfFinished: 10s
[...]
```

2

```yaml
objectRetentionPolicies:
  workloads:
    afterFinished: 10m
```

@alculquicondor WDYT?

Reviewer 5: I prefer 2. It looks more future-proof.

Reviewer 4: That sounds good to me.

Reviewer 4: This is a side note, although. To evolve API more easily, I want to find a way to guard the new API field :)

IIUC, k/k has the feature gate guard for the new API fields like here: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/1c4f540669397d031d464877ec3d2b8ac6be9b2f/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L543-L548

We can not break the new API field without bumping the API version in the current API evolving steps. I think that a new API without a guard makes API evolution harder since we need to consider future compatibility and extensibility in the first implementation.

Reviewer 5: The feature gate only implies that the field will be ignored when disabled. It doesn't mean that we can change the API in a future version.

Reviewer 4: Oh, I see. That was not my expected behavior.
Thanks for letting me know.

Reviewer 3: Have updated the API, introducing a section that should reflect changes for #4471

<!--
Describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

After the implementation PR is merged, add the names of the tests here.
-->

- Added behavior `Workload controller with resource retention` 
in `test/integration/controller/core/workload_controller_test.go`

[//]: # (### Graduation Criteria)

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (<!--)

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (Clearly define what it means for the feature to be implemented and)

[//]: # (considered stable.)

[//]: # ()
[//]: # (If the feature you are introducing has high complexity, consider adding graduation)

[//]: # (milestones with these graduation criteria:)

[//]: # (- [Maturity levels &#40;`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`&#41;][maturity-levels])

[//]: # (- [Feature gate][feature gate] lifecycle)

[//]: # (- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy])

[//]: # ()
[//]: # ([feature gate]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md)

[//]: # ([maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions)

[//]: # ([deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/)

> [//]: # (-->)

Reviewer 4: Could you revert these comment-outs since we need to revisit here when we want to graduate this feature to Beta/Stable?

Author: I explicitly commented it out instead of removing it so it could be revisited later but maybe it needs to be there from the beginning? It's my first KEP ever so I'm learning as I go and I'll follow your guidance 🙏

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Currently, Kueue does not delete its own Kubernetes objects, leaving it to Kubernetes' 
garbage collector (GC) to manage the retention of objects created by Kueue, such as Pods, Jobs, and Workloads. 
We do not set any expiration on these objects, so by default, they are kept indefinitely. Based on usage patterns, 
including the amount of jobs created, their complexity, and frequency over time, these objects can accumulate, 
leading to unnecessary use of etcd storage and a gradual increase in Kueue's memory footprint. Some of these objects, 
like finished Workloads, do not contain any useful information that could be used for additional purposes, such as debugging. 
That's why, based on user feedback in [#1618](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1618)

> or [#1789](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1789), a mechanism for garbage collection of finished Workloads 

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if the KEP and the initial implementation tackle this issue, because the workloads in the context of this issue are not necessarily finished.

Author: I checked and even though, an extension to the code would be minimal I'd rather keep it as a separate task not to pollute and further delay this feature. I will update the KEP once I have something more polished then just a draft version of how the removal of orphaned workloads would look like. For now I'm going to remove the orphaned Workloads issue from the KEP. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Thank you for checking I think removing them from the KEP makes sense, because:
- they are not finished
- there is no point in keeping such workloads for >30min (or whatever is configured).
So, I consider https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/1789 to be just a bug which does not require any API changes or KEP,.

Reviewer 2: Actually, on the second thought. I think it is better to honor user's choice of using "orphan" mode. So, I would suggest to just transition them to finished state. This way we could again link the issue and the KEP.

Author: SGTM 🖖 

I'll link the message in the other thread so that we don't loose the context.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a new API called `objectRetentionPolicies`, 
which will enable specifying a retention policy for finished Workloads under an option 
called `FinishedWorkloadRetention`. This API section could be extended in the future 
with options for other Kueue-authored objects.

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

Based on how the retention policy is configured for finished Workloads, 
several user stories are proposed below.

#### Story 1 - Configurable retention for finished Workloads

As a Kueue administrator, I want to control the retention of 

> finished Workloads to minimize the memory footprint and optimize 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
finished Workloads to optimize 
```

either be requeued for later reconciliation or deleted.

#### Story 3 - Retention policy for finished Workloads is configured and set to 0s

When the object retention policy is set to 0 seconds, finished Workloads will be 
deleted immediately during the first reconciliation loop after they are declared finished.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

- Initially, other naming was considered for config keys. Namely, instead of "Objects," 
the word "Resources" was used, but based on feedback from `@alculquicondor`, it was changed 
because "Resources" bears too many meanings in the context of kueue 
(Kubernetes resources, physical resources, etc.).
- A different implementation was proposed initially. The deletion logic was not 
supposed to be part of the `Reconcile` function but rather was supposed to have 
its own handler/watcher pair. During implementation, this proved challenging 
without substantial changes to the code. Also, creating a watcher for 

> completed Workloads proved to be very complex.

Reviewer: Could we move this point to the Alternatives section, and list its pros and cons?

Author: Done in: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/2742/commits/2d59922d3a0a32aaea36e70c14d8a2d9f55fd0bc

of new jobs. From the user's perspective, it may seem like kueue's initialization 
time is very long for that initial run until all expired objects are deleted.\
**M**: Unfortunately, there is no easy way to mitigate this without complicating the code.
A potential improvement would be to have a dedicated internal queue that handles deletion 
outside the reconciliation loop, or to delete expired objects in batches so that after 
a batch of deletions is completed, any remaining expired objects would be skipped until 
the next run of the loop. However, this would go against the synchronous nature of the reconciliation loop.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

### API
```go
// Configuration is the Schema for the kueueconfigurations API
type Configuration struct {
    //...
    // ObjectRetentionPolicies provides configuration options for retention of kueue owned

>     // resources.

Reviewer: Maybe we could also add comment that states that a nil value disables deletion?

Author: Good point. Added!

    ObjectRetentionPolicies *ObjectRetentionPolicies `json:"objectRetentionPolicies,omitempty"`
}

//...

type ObjectRetentionPolicies struct {
    // FinishedWorkloadRetention is the duration to retain finished Workloads.
    // A duration of 0 will delete finished Workloads immediately.
    // A nil value will disable automatic deletion.
    // The value is represented using the metav1.Duration format, allowing for flexible
    // specification of time units (e.g., "24h", "1h30m", "30s").
    //
    // Defaults to null.
    // +optional

>     FinishedWorkloadRetention *metav1.Duration `json:"finishedWorkloadRetention"`

Reviewer: Could this name suggest the field is related to time e.g. `FinishedWorkloadRetentionTime`

Author: It could and if you feel strongly about it I'm happy to do it. Personally I think it'd a bit excessive and redundant since retention in this context could only be associated with time. But as I said, if you think it'd improve the clarity of the code and if in your opinion the association isn't obvious and could be mistaken with something else I'll make the change. WDYT?

- Configure retention policies (like `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished`) that are attached to 
individual Kubernetes objects.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

Add a new API called `objectRetentionPolicies`, 
which will enable specifying a retention policy for finished Workloads under an option 
called `FinishedWorkloadRetention`. This API section could be extended in the future 
with options for other kueue-authored objects.

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

Based on how the retention policy is configured for finished Workloads, 
several user stories are proposed below.

> #### Story 0 - Retention policy for finished Workloads is misconfigured

Author: I moved the misconfiguration and default scenario to notes as suggested. I squeezed all stories into one more generic and moved the description of the behavior to its own section Behavior in Design Details.

> #### Story 0 - Retention policy for finished Workloads is misconfigured

Reviewer 2: sounds good, feel free to resolve the comment. Followed up with just minor tweaks.

  - new unit test: `set object retention policy for finished workloads` which
  checks if provided can configuration overrides default values.
- `pkg/config/config_test.go`
  - updated existing tests with `defaultObjectRetentionPolicies` set to nil 
  which tests if for existing tests the default behavior maintains backward
  compatibility and results in no retention settings.
  - new unit test: `objectRetentionPolicies config` which sets some example 
  retention policy and then checks if it can be retrieved.
- `pkg/controller/core/workload_controller_test.go`
  - added following new tests:
    - `shouldn't delete the workload because, object retention not configured`
    - `shouldn't try to delete the workload (no event emitted) because it is already being deleted by kubernetes, object retention configured`
    - `shouldn't try to delete the workload because the retention period hasn't elapsed yet, object retention configured`
    - `should delete the workload because the retention period has elapsed, object retention configured`
    - `should delete the workload immediately after it completed because the retention period is set to 0s`

#### Integration tests

> <!--

Reviewer 2: I think a single scenario to verify that workload is deleted for a finished Job when the retention is configured would be very helpful. (maybe there are more scenarios, but I believe they could be figured out during implementation).

Author: Added the test to the original PR and mentioned it here.

- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- Initial PR created for the feature pre-KEP [#2686](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/2686).

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

- Deleting objects is inherently complex, and garbage collection (GC) behavior can often be 
surprising for end-users who did not configure the service themselves. Even though the 
mechanism proposed in this KEP is relatively simple and must be explicitly enabled, 
it is a global mechanism applied at the controller level. The author has added some 
observability to the controller itself (logging and emitting deletion events), 
but Kubernetes users and developers accustomed to tracking object lifecycles 
using per-object policies might be surprised by this behavior.

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

- Leave the current state of things as is, not implementing any garbage 
collection mechanism for finished Workloads.

> - Implement retention policies attached per object (like `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished`) instead of having 

Reviewer 2: Also, workloads are objects internal to Kueue and created by Kueue, so it is not clear how users could set `.spec.ttlSecondsAfterFinished` on a workload.

Author: Good point. I forgot that the spec section is not populated by Kueue but by the user. I removed references to that field.
